---
author: Paul E. Johnson
date: 2018-02-18
title: Squash several small commits into 1 commit
---

# Why bother?

If you make several small commits, some of which are goofs
and errors, there is no reason to leave them in the history.

Squash them into one commit. This will give a new opportunity
to create 1 coherent commit message.

### Meaningful use cases:

**Usual Development Advice**: while developing new material, commit often!
This eliminates the usual problem: "I fixed this before but forgot how
I fixed it and then I deleted that section from the project."

After "finishing" you may have 20 commits and you don't want everybody
see them.

**Erase Embarassing Goofs**: perhaps you make commit messages that are
entirely wrong.  Perhaps you goof up a file. If you rebase the
sequence of commits, those goofs are completely dropped from
history. They will never be visible to you, or anybody else, in the
future. History is rewritten.

# Where to read more

I learned about this from:

http://gitready.com/advanced/2009/02/10/squashing-commits-with-rebase.html

# How to squash commits interactively

This interactive method is the only way I would consider doing this.

1. Figure out how many commits we might want to squash

    $ git log

2. Suppose that says the last 4 commits are involved

    $ git rebase -i HEAD~4

for example, grabs 4 most recent commits. We can absorb them into
subsets by replacing "pick" with "squash".

3. The top of the file will have one line per commit, like

    pick ...
    pick ...
    pick ...
    pick ...

Leave all of those lines--do not delete any--but if you want
to combine some, change the pick to "s" (short for "squash").

	pick ...
	s    ...
	s    ...
	s    ...

After closing the editor, Git will ask for a commit message
where the 4 messages from the commits are available for editing.


If the Git squash works, it runs a commit for you, it will
look like this:

	$ git rebase -i HEAD~4
	[detached HEAD dae7159] rnw2pdf-knit instruction rename rmd2pdf-guide: instruction recompile
	 Date: Sun Feb 18 11:00:47 2018 -0600
	 10 files changed, 0 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
	 delete mode 100644 package/crmda/inst/rmarkdown/templates/rnw2pdf-guide-sweave/guide-sweave-instructions.pdf
	 rename package/crmda/inst/rmarkdown/templates/rnw2pdf-report-knit/skeleton/{rnw2pdf-instructions.Rnw => report-knit-instructions.Rnw} (100%)
	 rename package/crmda/inst/rmarkdown/templates/rnw2pdf-report-knit/skeleton/{rnw2pdf-instructions.lyx => report-knit-instructions.lyx} (100%)
	 rename package/crmda/inst/rmarkdown/templates/rnw2pdf-report-knit/skeleton/{rnw2pdf-instructions.pdf => report-knit-instructions.pdf} (100%)
	Successfully rebased and updated refs/heads/master.
	
And the git log will show only one commit where there were 4.	

# Cautions

## DO NOT DELETE A COMMIT from the list when asked to  pick or squash.

If you delete a line from the message, the effect is to remove
that commit from the project.  It does not simply take it out
of consideration for the rebase. It is destructive.

## DO NOT rebase after pushing to a remote server

I am not sure if this is a fatal error, but we are warned not
to do it because, if somebody else is using same project, then
their interaction with the server will become incoherent.  If they
have pulled updates, and then you squash and push, then their
history does not make sense anymore.

If you are working by yourself on one computer, I don't think this is
dangerous. If you are working by yourself on one project from 2 or 3
computers, then it is a problem, because your "other selves" on the
other computers will not understand what you are doing.

## Minor issue: all tracked files must be committed or "stashed" 

Git will refuse to launch the rebase if some files that are
being tracked have not been committed.  It will say to commit
those changes, or stash them.  Stash has the effect of removing
your edits and hiding them in another place.
