Paul E. Johnson  
2016-10-10
update 2018-01-30

# **ANNOUNCEMENT** As of 2016-10-10, we started using Git LFS

This separates the tracking of large binary files from the tracking of
text files.  The large binary files, such as movies, PDF, MS Word, or
other files are stored in a separate file server.

**Why?** Git LFS eases the workload on the core Git engine, which has
trouble calculating changes between new versions of binary files.
This is used in our guides repository and also in our workshops.  This
way, we avoid tracking PDF, movie, and audio files as if they were
text in Git.

Git LFS (also referred to as "git-lfs") keeps binary files in a
separate storage location. The tech staff in ITTC runs
gitlab.crmda.ku.edu for us and they handle the system administration
details (thankfully).


# Learn about Git LFS. Please watch some Video

Newer:

GitLFS - How to handle large files in Git - Lars Schneider - FOSSASIA Summit 2017
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQzNfb4IwEY

Previous:

What is Git LFS (by Tim Peterson)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9gaTargV5BY

Git Large File Storage - How to Work with Big Files (GitHub Training
Team)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uLR1RNqJ1Mw


# Git LFS installation is required.

Git LFS is a separate piece of software, which must be installed in
the workstation.

See: https://git-lfs.github.com/


# Basic simple usage scenario

1. Git LFS is installed

2. Run this in the user account, git needs to be made aware that the
user intends to use Git LFS.

    $ git lfs install

This has to be done only once, it is then available to all
repositories.

The Git LFS documents suggest running it in each user account, but we
have checked and it is possible, at least in Linux, to enable it on a
system-wide level when Git LFS is installed. In our computer lab, we
install Git LFS and (we believe successfully, at least so far) enable
it system-wide. The root user installs Git LFS and then runs

    $ git lfs install --system

After that, it will be handled for all users. 

The explanation was based on an answer we obtained in https://gitter.im/github/git-lfs
and it has worked well so far.

3. Tell Git LFS to track file types.

For an existing project, this may have been done already.  However, in
a new project, or when a new file type is to be tracked it is
necessary to tell Git LFS to track file types.  Here we give the
example which shows how to designate PDF files as binary blobs so that
LFS will handle them. This can be done either by manually editing a
configuration file, ".gitattributes", or by running this

    $ git lfs track "*.pdf"

That will insert a line in a file .gitattributes.

    *.pdf filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text

This must be done for each extension that is to be tracked by LFS.
In our guides repository at the current time, .gitattributes has
grown to look like this:

    *.pdf filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
    *.ogv filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
    *.tar.gz filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
    *.zip filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
    *.png filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text
    *.mp4 filter=lfs diff=lfs merge=lfs -text

It seems like we ought to have a larger standard list for these,
but all good things come in time.

This may have been done already if you clone an on-going project. You
can check using command in item #5 below, or also by looking to see if
your git repository.

A. Caution about capitalization

In the YouTube presentation mentioned above by Lars Schneider,
some operating systems are not case sensitive, while Git is case
sensitive. On a Windows computer, users are led to believe by the
graphical interface (Windows File Explorer) that file names respect
case, but in fact they do not.  As a result, one is advised to be
cautious in creating the .gitattrites file. He suggests using 

     $ git lfs track "*.[pP][dD][fF]"

B. Where should the .gitattributes file be located?

We ran into a confusing issue when we converted some standard Git
repositories to LFS.  There can be many .gitattributes files, one in
each directory. This is a defect in the repository conversion
software.

If there is just one in the top level of the repo, then it applies to
all sub-folders.  However, one can create different .gitattributes
files in sub-folders and these might contradict.  We suggest getting
rid of .gitattributes files from sub directories and maintaining the
one version at the top level of the repository.


4. The file .gitattributes should be added to git tracking if that
has not been done already, i.e.

    $ git add .gitattributes
	$ git commit .gitattributes

The commit must happen every time the file changes--meaning new types
of files are tracked.

5. Run this to check what Git LFS is tracking

    $ git lfs track

6. Review files incorporated by Git LFS now

    $ git lfs ls-files

7. Review the Git LFS setup:

    $ git lfs env


# Clone a Git LFS capable repository: Networking Problem

Ordinarily, it should be as simple as cloning any other repository (assuming
Git LFS is properly installed):

   $ git clone git@gitlab.crmda.ku.edu:crmda/guides.git

However, the gitlab.crmda.ku.edu setup for this has some
complications.  For the moment, we have a web server certificate
problem, so Git LFS will fail unless we turn off certificate checking.
Insert a prefix GIT_SSL_NO_VERIFY=true, as in

    $ GIT_SSL_NO_VERIFY=true git clone git@gitlab.crmda.ku.edu:crmda/guides.git

This works, but it is difficult to remember.  The prefix GIT_SSL_NO_VERIFY=true
must be inserted *EVERY TIME* you interact with gitlab.crmda.ku.edu.

The certificate checking can be turned off globally:

    $ git config --global http.sslverify false
	
To preserve sanity, that is what I've done, recognizing that it might
be a problem in the future.

# Troubleshooting

## Need to check if you do have Git LFS? Run this

Confirm you don't have git lfs

    $ git lfs ls-files
    git: 'lfs' is not a git command. See 'git --help'.

    Did you mean this?
    	log

That proves there's no lfs installed.


## User forgets to install Git LFS, but clones anway. What then?

A user does not have Git LFS properly configured, but clones
the LFS-enabled repository.

Two problems will be apparent.

   1. The user will not "see" the contents of the PDF and other
   lfs-tracked files

   2. The user may "corrupt" the lfs repository by
   accidentally inserting binary files.  Once those files are pushed
   to the remote server, then some fancy dancing will be needed to
   eliminate them.

   Obviously, we don't want that to happen. But it must be dealt with
because it certainly does happen. 

### Problem 1: User will not "see" PDF and other lfs-tracked files.

A clean clone on an lfs enabled git system looks like this:

     $ GIT_SSL_NO_VERIFY=true git clone git@gitlab.crmda.ku.edu:crmda/guides.git
     Cloning into 'guides'...
     X11 forwarding request failed on channel 0
     remote: Counting objects: 1426, done.
     remote: Compressing objects: 100% (918/918), done.
     remote: Total 1426 (delta 565), reused 1252 (delta 471)
     Receiving objects: 100% (1426/1426), 152.14 MiB | 8.75 MiB/s, done.
     Resolving deltas: 100% (565/565), done.
     Checking connectivity... done.
     Downloading 04.StartingValuesInLISREL/04.StartingValuesInLISREL.pdf (183.78 KB)
     Downloading 05.WhatToReport/05.WhatToReport.pdf (232.22 KB)
     Downloading 06.Satorra-BentlerChi-Sq/06.Satorra-BentlerChi-Sq.pdf (194.36 KB)
     Downloading 07.Bootstrapping/07.Bootstrapping.pdf (242.47 KB)
     Downloading 08.MultipleImputation/08.MultipleImputation.pdf (359.59 KB)
     Downloading 09.RP.option.in.LISREL/09.RP.option.in.LISREL.pdf (118.04 KB)
     Downloading 10.AP.option.in.LISREL/10.AP.option.in.LISREL.pdf (113.23 KB)
     Downloading 11.ImputationWithLargeDataSets/11.ImputationWithLargeDataSets.pdf (470.74 KB)
     Downloading 12.MplusMonteCarloSimulation/12.MplusMonteCarloSimulation.pdf (228.04 KB)
     Downloading 13.MplusSyntaxGuide/13.MplusSyntaxGuide.pdf (236.69 KB)
     Downloading 14.SAS.DataConversion/14.SAS.DataConversion.pdf (406.41 KB)
     Downloading 15.LongitudinalMediation/15.LongitudinalMediation.pdf (212.76 KB)
     Downloading 16.LatentVariableModeration/16.LatentVariableModeration.pdf (212.10 KB)
     Downloading 18.PathDiagramsInWord/18.PathDiagramsInWord.pdf (1.69 MB)
     Downloading 20.IntroToR/20.IntroToR.pdf (331.59 KB)
     Downloading 21.LavaanSyntaxGuide/21.LavaanSyntaxGuide.pdf (327.50 KB)
     Downloading 22.MeasurementInvariance/22.MeasurementInvariance.pdf (603.06 KB)
     Downloading 23.PlannedMissingness/23.PlannedMissingness.pdf (406.90 KB)
     Downloading 24.TracingRules/24.TracingRules.pdf (955.48 KB)
     Downloading 25.ANOVA.and.Regression.in.R/25.ANOVA.and.Regression.in.R.pdf (280.63 KB)
     Downloading 26.PathDiagramsUsingDia/26.Dia_Import.zip (59.20 KB)
     Downloading 26.PathDiagramsUsingDia/26.PathDiagramsUsingDia.pdf (1.26 MB)
     Downloading 26.PathDiagramsUsingDia/26.PathDiagramsUsingDia.zip (3.62 MB)
     Downloading 27.DyadicAnalysesInSEM/27.DyadicAnalysesInSEM.pdf (598.89 KB)
     Downloading 30.nomachine/30.NoMachine-Cheatsheet.pdf (75.82 KB)
     Downloading 30.nomachine/30.NoMachineTutorial.pdf (821.41 KB)
     Downloading 30.nomachine/images/CRMDA_1PMS293_UnitHorz.pdf (40.77 KB)
     Downloading 30.nomachine/images/jayhawk.pdf (72.62 KB)
     Downloading 31.git/31.git-slides.ogv (153.40 MB)
     Downloading 31.git/31.git-slides.pdf (275.26 KB)
     Downloading 31.git/31.git.pdf (718.08 KB)
     Downloading 32.latex_config/32.latex_config.pdf (419.26 KB)
     Downloading 33.SAS_Linux/33.sas_linux.pdf (6.63 MB)
     Downloading 34.GitLab/34.gitlab.pdf (481.17 KB)
     Downloading 36.LaTeX_Overview/LaTeX-Overview.ogv (88.88 MB)
     Downloading 36.LaTeX_Overview/LaTeX-Overview.pdf (239.39 KB)
     Downloading 37.LyX-for_LaTeX_homework/LyX-LaTeX_homework-slides.pdf (302.01 KB)
     Downloading 37.LyX-for_LaTeX_homework/LyX-LaTeX_homework.pdf (322.37 KB)
     Downloading 39.projects/writeup/projects.zip (479.67 KB)
     Downloading 39.projects/writeup/projects_slides-1.ogv (32.35 MB)
     Downloading 39.projects/writeup/projects_slides-1.pdf (490.38 KB)
     Downloading KUant_Guides_1-13.pdf (1.49 MB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/1._sintaxis_de_LISREL_8.pdf (819.39 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/10._parametros_alternativos.pdf (23.49 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/11._imputacion_con_grandes_bases_de_datos.pdf (38.01 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/12._simulaciones_Monte_Carlo_en_Mplus.pdf (25.96 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/13._sintaxis_de_Mplus.pdf (51.14 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/14._conversion_de_datos_en_SAS.pdf (167.96 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/15._mediacion_longitudinal.pdf (98.06 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/16._moderacion.pdf (80.18 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/17._PROC_CALIS_en_SAS_9.22.pdf (109.67 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/18._diagramas_de_senderos_en_Microsoft_Word_2007.pdf (2.16 MB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/19._algebra_de_caovarianza_de_las_parcelas.pdf (90.69 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/2._introduciendo_datos_en_LISREL.pdf (121.21 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/3._intrepretando_la_salida_de_LISREL.pdf (148.90 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/4._valores_de_partida_en_LISREL.pdf (221.87 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/5._que_reporter.pdf (384.40 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/6._SB_chi_SQ.pdf (264.48 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/7._bootstrap.pdf (139.21 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/8._Imputacion_de_datos.pdf (165.33 KB)
     Downloading Spanish_KUant_Guides/PDFs/9._opcion_RP_en_LISREL.pdf (23.91 KB)
     Downloading keyword_guide/guide_keywords.pdf (76.71 KB)
     Checking out files: 100% (287/287), done.


In comparison, consider a clone on system where LFS is not properly installed:

     $ git clone git@gitlab.crmda.ku.edu:crmda/guides.git
     Cloning into 'guides'...
     Enter passphrase for key '/home/pauljohn/.ssh/PaulJohnson-id_rsa-20110510':
     remote: Counting objects: 1426, done.
     remote: Compressing objects: 100% (918/918), done.
     remote: Total 1426 (delta 565), reused 1252 (delta 471)
     Receiving objects: 100% (1426/1426), 152.14 MiB | 30.73 MiB/s, done.
     Resolving deltas: 100% (565/565), done.
     
     [pauljohn@n407 gitlfstest]$ cd guides/
     [pauljohn@n407 guides]$ cd 31.git/
     [pauljohn@n407 31.git]$ ls -la
     total 688
     drwxrwxr-x  3 pauljohn pauljohn   4096 Oct 14 08:56 .
     drwxr-xr-x 37 pauljohn pauljohn   8192 Oct 14 08:56 ..
     -rw-rw-r--  1 pauljohn pauljohn    171 Oct 14 08:56 .gitattributes
     -rw-rw-r--  1 pauljohn pauljohn   7604 Oct 14 08:56 31.git-lfs.txt
     -rw-rw-r--  1 pauljohn pauljohn  27104 Oct 14 08:56 31.git-slides.lyx
     -rw-rw-r--  1 pauljohn pauljohn    134 Oct 14 08:56 31.git-slides.ogv
     -rw-rw-r--  1 pauljohn pauljohn    131 Oct 14 08:56 31.git-slides.pdf
     -rw-rw-r--  1 pauljohn pauljohn    598 Oct 14 08:56 31.git-squash.txt
     -rw-rw-r--  1 pauljohn pauljohn 196761 Oct 14 08:56 31.git.lyx
     -rw-rw-r--  1 pauljohn pauljohn    131 Oct 14 08:56 31.git.pdf
     drwxrwxr-x  2 pauljohn pauljohn   4096 Oct 14 08:56 images

Note that the PDF and OGV files are very very small, they cannot possibly
include the actual content. Instead, they have the remote address of the
file in the lfs server.

Consider what seems to be inside "31.git-slides.ogv".  Git stores the
reference file to the screencast:
     
     $ cat 31.git-slides.ogv
     version https://git-lfs.github.com/spec/v1
     oid sha256:e43c0b93f1b865fa67a4d20cc748fb54611bde145558494ef707bf85159d013a
     size 160854025

If you have git-lfs working correctly, then you won't see that reference link,
you will see something that appears to be the "actual" ogv file.
     
### Problem 2: user adds binary files and pushes them.

This is a "cleanup on isle 2" sort of problem.  A binary file
was added into the project history and it is difficult to remove. We'd
rather avoid it. It is discussed in the next few items. 


## If you made the mistake of cloning an LFS repository but you
did not have LFS installed: **STOP!**

Erase the clone folder, install Git LFS, run the install command
mentioned above, then pull a new clone directory. 


## User error: You did not realize that you were lacking git-lfs until
it was too late!

If you treat this like an ordinary git repository, the pdf files (or
other binary files the repo is set to track as binaries) that are
added are seen as ordinary files.

I asked what to do in that case. An answer was provided by Lars
Schneider in https://github.com/git-lfs/git-lfs/issues/2845

Here is the way to fix that.

1. Install Git LFS and enable it

2. Pull a clean clone of the repository in a fresh directory

3. Navigate to the directory where the problem file is.  

    git rm --cached <PROBLEM FILE>
    git add --force <PROBLEM FILE>
    git commit -m "Move files properly to GitLFS"

This does not expunge the errant files from the history of the project, but
we are advised to ignore them and let them be unless they are truly huge. If
they are huge, we need to take great care to expunge them without corrupting
the entire history of the project.

## How does the previous problem become apparent to other users in the project?

When another user fetches your updates from the system, they will
encounter errors that look like this:

    $ git checkout cx-guide_47_mac_R_setup
    Switched to branch 'cx-guide_47_mac_R_setup'
    Your branch is behind 'origin/cx-guide_47_mac_R_setup' by 14 commits, and can be fast-forwarded.
      (use "git pull" to update your local branch)
    Encountered 1 file(s) that should have been pointers, but weren't:
        47.mac_R_setup/47.mac_R_setup-slides.pdf
		


## Administrator Problems: Convert an existing repo with binary files
inside it into a Git LFS setup.

*Problem*. The binaries are "in" the history. Running
this now

    $ git track "*.pdf"

only converts the "right now" pdf files into LFS reference
files.

So we need to cut those binaries and fiddling with git history is
confusing and frustrating. To rip apart the history and remove the pdf
files, we run into contradictory advice.  I tried the BFG repocleaner
first, but on https://github.com/github/git-lfs/wiki/Tutorial they say
no instead the best thing is git-lfs-migrate,
https://github.com/bozaro/git-lfs-migrate.


## You did "git clone" but got no binary files?

For some reason, we are not sure why, you may have Git LFS but your
clone does not have the PDF files. You see only the references. This
used to happen with older versions of Git LFS, we have not seen it
happen since version 1.5. 

I experienced this when I pulled the guides updates "on top" of my
previous guides repository. I made the mistake of not DELETING the old
repo and making a fresh clone.  I had the "old" guides repo in place,
and I ran "git pull". After that the "pdf" files were not there. There
were only files with "references" to pdfs that might be downloaded if
we need them.

Running "git lfs pull" caused git to fill in the pdfs.

    $ GIT_SSL_NO_VERIFY=true git lfs pull
    Git LFS: (58 of 58 files) 118.57 MB / 119.00 MB

While this is not the recommended method, it did work.
